# Break Free From 9 to 5

Breaking free from 9 to 5 doesn’t mean instant freedom. In fact, it leads us to another question. How do we manage our schedule now that no one supervises us?

For me, a good analogy for this is like a high school and a university student. In high school, we don’t have to think about our schedule because it’s all been defined by the school. On the contrary, as university students, we have to think about what we want to achieve throughout the semester and build our own schedule based on that. As university students, people expect us to be independent enough to manage our own schedule, and that’s exactly the same trait that people expect from a remote worker. 

Before the pandemic, I heard a lot of stories from local companies who tried to allow their employees to work remotely for once in a while, but still expect them to be online all the time during the office hours just like how they work from an office. I thought there’s a misalignment in how the employer perceives remote working versus how the employee actually expects.

From the employee’s point of view, I know that personal life gets in the way sometimes. And when you work remotely, some of you may think that you could attend to your own business freely. However, being away from the office doesn’t mean that you can do your personal business simultaneously with your office work because no one supervises you. You still have to ask permission and give advance notice if you have something else to do during our usual office hours. 

The same goes for the employer. Not being responsive for a few minutes doesn’t mean that your employee is not productive. There’s nothing more annoying than getting pinged by a coworker when we want to focus on an important task. When we work together in the same room, you can notice if your coworker is doing serious work. However, when we work miles away from our team, we have no way to know if our coworker is seriously focusing on something or just slacking off. 

`“Tree time” is what we call our interrupted work time. - Belle Beth Cooper`

Belle Beth Cooper, founder of Hello Code calls it “tree time” in the book called The Ultimate Guide to Remote Work by Wade Foster and the Zapier Team. It’s a code that she shared with her co-founder whenever she wanted to have uninterrupted time to focus on something.

There’s no way we can do remote work without trust. And this is fundamental. If you keep on checking your teammates to see if they’re working, you just set yourself (and your teammates) up for frustration.

However, this doesn’t mean that we can work whenever we like. Company and the employee should set their expectations upfront, whether they have a requirement when it comes to office hours, or about how much overlap they may need to communicate as a team. Overlap time between teammates is important to allow group discussion and collaboration. There’s no negotiation here. And that’s how the calendar is a crucial app for many remote workers.

A colleague of mine once said that “If it’s not on the calendar, it does not exist.” And that’s true. Usually, the first app that I check before starting the day is the calendar. The calendar, I believe, is the second most important app that I need for working remotely after the browser.

To think about it, remote working actually teaches us to learn to appreciate people’s time more. In an office, we can just shout to each other to have a meeting. However, in a remote environment, you should learn to be considerate of each other. Scheduling a meeting is asking for attention that we can use to work on something else, so make sure to only schedule a meeting if it's necessary.  

There are many things to cover when it comes to managing our time as remote workers. We haven’t even touched anything around timezone differences up to this point, and it’s such a painful thing to navigate, especially if you’re not used to working in a global team. 

From my previous story, it’s clear that we shouldn’t push ourselves to align our availability with the other team member’s time zone. And once I acknowledge it, I found that it’s such a pleasure to be able to have a quiet morning to work on something that needs intense focus and when no one can interrupt you. You see, although confusing, working across different time zones can turn into a benefit rather than an obstacle if we look from another standpoint.

----

<a href="https://docsify.js.org" target="_blank" style="color: inherit; font-weight: normal; text-decoration: none;">Powered by docsify</a>